First cut at trust mngt (#1)
ehn-digital-green-development/hcert-spec: hcert_spec.md

Ability to read and interpret EHCs issued by any Issuer requires a common data structure and agreements of the significance of each data field. To facilitate such interoperability, a common coordinated data structure is defined through the use of a JSON schema, Appendix A. Critical elements of a health certificate SHOULD use this data structure. A Participant MAY extend the objects with proprietary data. The naming of such objects MUST be agreed between all Participants.

> Note that the data structure is of importance here. The actual wire format is language neutral (CBOR).

Author: done

The Key Identifier (**kid**) claim is used by Verifiers for selecting the correct public key from a list of keys pertaining to the Issuer (**iss**) Claim. Several keys may be used in parallel by an Issuer for administrative reasons and when performing key rollovers.The Key Identifier is not a security-critical field. For this reason, it MAY also be placed in an unprotected header if required. Verifiers MUST accept both options.

> The key identifier consists of the final (TBD) 8 bytes of the SHA256 fingerprint of the DSC (see section Trust management). Due to this shortening to 8 bytes there is a non-finite chance that the overall list of DSCs accepted by an validator contains DSCs with duplicate KIDs. For this reason a verifier MUST check all DSCs with that KID.

Author: Fine with me too - it is just that i had another C# / Windows user getting it 'wrong' - as the general UIs show an extra  two extra bytes in front of any SHA fingerprint shown.

> The key identifier consists of the final (TBD) 8 bytes of the SHA256 fingerprint of the DSC (see section Trust management). Due to this shortening to 8 bytes there is a non-finite chance that the overall list of DSCs accepted by an validator contains DSCs with duplicate KIDs. For this reason a verifier MUST check all DSCs with that KID.

Author: Correct - and agreed on these pro & cons.

> The key identifier consists of the final (TBD) 8 bytes of the SHA256 fingerprint of the DSC (see section Trust management). Due to this shortening to 8 bytes there is a non-finite chance that the overall list of DSCs accepted by an validator contains DSCs with duplicate KIDs. For this reason a verifier MUST check all DSCs with that KID.

Author: raised issue #5

The Expiration Time (**exp**) claim SHALL hold a timestamp in the NumericDate format (as specified in [RFC 8392](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc8392) section 2) indicating for how long this particular signature over the Payload SHALL be considered valid, after which a Verifier MUST reject the Payload as expired. The purpose of the expiry parameter is to force a limit of the validity period of the EHC. The Claim Key 4 is used to identify this claim.

> The Expiration Time MUST not exceed the validity time in the DSC.  The verifier SHOULD check this.

Reviewer: This somewhat contradicts the trust model which states that if a DSC is on the list, it is trusted. Otherwise it is not. If this is a validation rule on top of that, it could mean that a DSC which is on the list is suddenly considered untrusted.

An error by a HCERT issuer in this area could be more or less catastrophic. Envision the case that someone generating that DSC now (spring 2021) sets its validity time to two years (because they think the pandemic must surely be over by then), but the eHealth authority continues issuing certificates up to the expiry of the certificate. All HCERTs currently issued and valid would suddenly go invalid.

Author: So we should clarify this. Will edit.

Author: Raised issue #4

#### Issued At

The Issued At (**ia**t) claim SHALL hold a timestamp in the NumericDate format (as specified in [RFC 8392](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc8392) section 2) indicating the time when the EHC was created. 

> The Issued At  MUST not predate the validity time in the DSC.  The verifier MAY check this.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Issued At MUST not predate the validity time in the DSC.  The verifier MAY check this.
```

Same comment as above, but the risks of negative consequences are likely smaller. But I am reluctant to adding validation rules which contradicts the basic principle of the trust list. However, a verifier MAY or even SHOULD check that ```iat``` is not in the future?

Verifiers MAY also apply additional policies with the purpose of restricting the validity of the EHC based on the time of issue. The Claim Key 6 is used to identify this claim.

#### Health Certificate Claim

The Health Certificate (**hcert**) claim is a JSON ([RFC 7159](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7159)) object containing the health status information, which has been encoded and serialised using CBOR as defined in ([RFC 7049](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7049)). Several EHCs MAY exist under the same claim.

> dirkx: _do we want this ? ie. make the JSON leading ? or do we simply make the JSON a rendition - but from a standard perspective try to keep the CBOR the 'master' ?_

Author: Ok - let me edit this better then.

Verifiers MUST check of the presence of a valid ZLIB/Deflate header (0x78, 0xDA) - or proceed without this step when absent.

In order to better handle legacy equipment designed to operate on ASCII payloads, the compressed CWT is encoded as ASCII using [Base45](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-faltstrom-base45) before encoded into a barcode.

Two barcode formats are supported; AZTEC (preferred) and QR (secondary). 

In order for readers to be able to detect optical payload content type, the base45 encoded data per this specification SHALL be prefixed by the string "HC1".

#### AZTEC 2D Barcode

To optically represent the EHC using a compact machine-readable format the Aztec 2D Barcode (ISO/IEC 24778:2008) SHOULD be used.

When generating the optical code with Aztec, an error correction rate of 23% is RECOMMENDED. The optical code is RECOMMENDED to be rendered on the presentation media with a diagonal size between 35 mm and 65 mm.

#### QR 2D Barcode

> Alternatively a QR barcode may be used. An error correction rate of ‘Q’ (around 25%) RECOMMENDED.  The Alphanumeric (Mode 2/QR Code symbols 0010) MUST be used in conjunction with Base45. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Alternatively a QR barcode may be used. An error correction rate of ‘Q’ (around 25%) is RECOMMENDED.  The Alphanumeric (Mode 2/QR Code symbols 0010) MUST be used in conjunction with Base45. 
```

> The optical code is RECOMMENDED to be rendered on the presentation media with a diagonal size between 35 mm and 65 mm when used on an optical screen with at least 4 pixels per timing cell. 

Reviewer: Do we need "[...] when used on an optical screen with at least 4 pixels per timing cell"? Thinking that the representation media can be both screens and papers.

FWIW we've seen all sorts of scaling problems when using low resolution thermal-transfer printers. If an optical code is scaled so that not all rows of symbols are exactly square, the reliability in reading/decoding decays significantly.

https://samtrafiken.atlassian.net/wiki/spaces/BOB/pages/28999786/Considerations+for+low-resolution+printing+of+Aztec+codes

Author: So the reason why I put this there was that we're not quite getting this out of our Qr test results. So I put in for Qr what I am fairly certain about. And left the paper case out - as we're getting some good result with size similar as used in Germany - which is just shy of 80mm

Author: Raised #6

The member-state certificates are called Certificate Signer Certificate Authority (CSCA) certificates and are (typically) self signed certificates. Countries may have more than one (e.g. in case of regional devolution). 

Memberstates are required to keep a public register of these certificates at a stable URL.

Memberstates may then bilaterally exchange CSCA certificates with a number of other States, verify these bilaterally and thus compile their own lists of CSCA certificates: a (MS specific) Master List. 

These CSCA certificates regularly sign the Document Signing Certificates (DSC) used in day to day operations. Memberstates will each will maintain a public register of the DSC certificates that is kept current.

Other memberstates must regularly fetch these list of DSC certificates and cryptographically verify these against the CSCA certificates (that they have verified by other, non-digital, means).  

The resulting list of DSC certificates then provides the acceptable public keys (and the corresponding KIDs) that verifiers can use to validate the signature on the CWT in the Qr code. 

> Verifiers should fetch update so this list regularly.

Reviewer 2: It would be good to explicitly state that the file format of the trusted list may vary, e.g. it can be a plain JWKS like https://github.com/ehn-digital-green-development/hcert-testdata/blob/main/testdata/jwks.json

Author: Adding.

# Appendix A - Payload

A proposed payload schema for [EU Health Certficate v1](eu_hcert_v1_schema.yaml).

# Appendix B - Trust management

The signature on the EHC requires a public key to verify. Countries, or institutions within countries, need to place those signatures. And ultimately every verifier needs to have a list of the public keys it is willing to trust (the public key is not part of the signature).

For this a simplified variation on the ICAO "_Master list_: will be used, tailored to this health application. Where each country is ultimately responsible for compiling their own master list. But with the aid of a coordinating secretariat for operational and practical purposes.

> The system consists of (just) two layers; for each Member State one or more country level certificate that each sign one or more document signing certificates that are used in day to day operations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The system consists of (just) two layers; for each Member State one or more country level CA certificates that each sign one or more document signing certificates that are used in day to day operations.
```

> The member-state certificates are called Certificate Signer Certificate Authority (CSCA) certificates and are (typically) self signed certificates. Countries may have more than one (e.g. in case of regional devolution). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The country level certificates are called Certificate Signer Certificate Authority (CSCA) certificates and are (typically) self signed certificates. Countries may have more than one (e.g. in case of regional devolution). 
```

> Memberstates are required to keep a public register of these certificates at a stable URL.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Member states are required to keep a public register of these certificates at a stable URL.
```

> Memberstates may then bilaterally exchange CSCA certificates with a number of other States, verify these bilaterally and thus compile their own lists of CSCA certificates: a (MS specific) Master List. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Member states may then bilaterally exchange CSCA certificates with other Member states, verify these bilaterally and thus compile their own lists of CSCA certificates: a (MS specific) Master List. 
```

> These CSCA certificates regularly sign the Document Signing Certificates (DSC) used in day to day operations. Memberstates will each will maintain a public register of the DSC certificates that is kept current.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These CSCA certificates regularly sign the Document Signing Certificates (DSC) used in day to day operations. Member states will each maintain a public register of the DSC certificates that is kept current.
```

> Other memberstates must regularly fetch these list of DSC certificates and cryptographically verify these against the CSCA certificates (that they have verified by other, non-digital, means).  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Other member states must regularly fetch these list of DSC certificates and cryptographically verify these against the CSCA certificates (that they have verified by other, non-digital, means).  
```

> The resulting list of DSC certificates then provides the acceptable public keys (and the corresponding KIDs) that verifiers can use to validate the signature on the CWT in the Qr code. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The resulting list of DSC certificates then provides the acceptable public keys (and the corresponding KIDs) that verifiers can use to validate the signature on the CWT in the optical code. 
```

> Verifiers should fetch update so this list regularly. Verifiers are expected to tune the format to this list for their own national setting; and the file format of this, internal, trusted list may vary, e.g. it can be a plain JWKS like https://github.com/ehn-digital-green-development/hcert-testdata/blob/main/testdata/jwks.json or something specific to the technology used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Verifiers are REQUIRED to update so this list regularly. Verifiers are expected to tune the format to this list for their own national setting; and the file format of this, internal, trusted list may vary, e.g. it can be a plain JWKS like https://github.com/ehn-digital-green-development/hcert-testdata/blob/main/testdata/jwks.json or something specific to the technology used.
```

There needs to be strict a policy for how long a verifier may retain a list, so that an issuer can schedule key roll-overs (for example).

## Differences with the ICAO MasterList system for passports

While patterned on best practices of the ICAO Ml - there are a number of simplifications made in the interest of speed (and recognising the fact that the EU Regulation for EHN is sharply limited in time and scope).

* A Member-state may submit multiple CSCA certificates
* A CSCA certificate may also be used --and published as-- a DSC.
* The DSC (key usage) validity period may be set to any length not exceeding the CSCA.
* The DSC certificate MAY contain policy identifers that are EHN specific.

## Secretariat

In order to alleviate the burden of countries during the initial phase -- there shall be a secretarial service that will:

> * Maintain a list of operational and legal contacts for each member-state to further orderly management of this health specific set of master lists.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Maintain a list of operational and legal contacts for each member state to ensure an orderly management of this health specific set of master lists.
```

> * Maintain a public 24x7 an incident/security contact point.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Maintain a public 24x7 incident/security point of contact.
```

> * Maintain a public list of URLs with the most up to date CSCA lists for each member-state.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Maintain a public list of URLs with the most up to date CSCA list for each member state.
```

> * Maintain a public  list of URLs with the most up to date DSC lists for each member-state.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Maintain a public list of URLs with the most up to date DSC list for each member state.
```

> * Maintain a public  single, aggregated, list of all CSCAs, that is updated daily.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Maintain a public single, aggregated, list of all CSCAs, that is updated daily.
```

> * Maintain a public single, aggregated, list of all DSAs, that is updated daily.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Maintain a public single, aggregated, list of all DSCs, that is updated daily.
```

> * Provides MS with a secure (i.e. integrity protected) manner by which to provide the Secretariat with the MS its CSCA and DSC lists (CIRBAC, t.b.c)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Provide MS with a secure (i.e. integrity protected) mechanism by which the Secretariat publishes the member states aggregated CSCA and DSC lists (CIRBAC, t.b.c)
```

> * Shall validate the DSCs against the CSCA prior to publication.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Validate the DSCs against the member state's CSCAs prior to publication.
```

Author: Merged.

> * MAY sign the aggregated list.

Reviewer: I think this is taken care of in the previous bullets? I suggest to strike it out.

Author: Ok - just strike it.

Author: done

> The format for these lists is TBC and will likely follow current ICAO-ML standards closely. They are likely to be optimised for clarity and interoperability. And are therefore highly likely to be very different from the trust-lists that the verifiers  download daily from the field. As these are highly Member State specific; and need to be tuned to the technological setting at hand.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The format for the lists used for the interchange between the member states and the Secretariat is TBC, and should be optimised for clarity and interoperability. The ICAO Master List structure as defined in Doc 9303 part 12 may be considered.

This list format for interchange between the member states is likely to be quite different from format of the list of DSCs downloaded by the verifiers on a daily basis from the field. The Secretariat should take care to publish the aggregated list of DSCs in an, from a verifiers perspective, accessible and easy to use format.

Member State are also expected to publish country-specific lists, in formats tuned to the technological setting at hand in that member state.
```

> And that also will

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And that the Secretarial also will:
```
